you know i have a lot of problems with
establishment institutions but you can't
just attack them
what what are we going to have left when
we've got no institutions well we could
have rubble and everyone could be equal
in the rubble that's happened many many
many times
and that's the risk
[Music]
hello everyone
i'm pleased
to have with me as a guest today claire
layman the founding editor of quillette
and someone i've known for a while now
as much as you could know someone when
you're in canada and they're in
australia
colette is a non-partisan online
publication that publishes long-form
commentary and analysis and which
specializes in ideas other outlets often
appear too timid to touch
colette's first anthology was panics and
persecutions 20 quillet tales of
excommunication in the digital age which
featured essays from those who have been
targeted by mobs in academic and
artistic communities claire is also a
regular contributor to the australian
the most widely read newspaper in
australia hello good to see you it's
been a long time since we've talked
hi john thanks so much for having me and
it's good to see you
so let's start by talking about
quillette let's go back to the beginning
you were a graduate student in
psychology if i remember correctly
pursuing a master's degree at that point
and then you took a sideways move and
why
uh well often people assumed that i left
uh university or left academia because
it was for a political
reason but it wasn't the case i
simp the the situation was simply that i
had a baby at the time
and i couldn't
juggle
my
uh
requirement to do hundreds of hours of
unpaid clinical work to complete my
master's with also
having a baby at home so i just uh
so you did something easy like start the
most controversial new magazine in in in
the world perhaps or in the english
speaking world
well it was it was a pro it was meant to
be a project to keep me occupied in
between quitting my masters and finding
a professional job it wasn't ever meant
to be in my career
but it it took off almost immediately
when
after i launched the website and
attracted quite an engaged readership so
uh
over time i naturally
started to focus more on collette and
less on other things and now it's my
full-time job and
it's my full-time you know occupies my
full-time mental capacity
and it's a it's a very rewarding and
fulfilling
occupation that's for sure
well you picked a great name so that's a
good start yeah and you've had great
writers i mean who who have you
particularly enjoyed publishing and what
do you think's been most worthwhile as
far as you're concerned
well the best part of the job is finding
young writers
and by young i mean very young in their
early 20s or even late teens in some
cases who
are brilliant
and who wouldn't be picked up by other
publications because
you know they don't know the right
people in media they're too young they
don't have the connections
i think one thing i've been really proud
of with colette is our
promotion of young talent promotion of
talent that you know we we have writers
that come from rural areas to our in the
big cities we have
um
a really diverse
we we publish
older people younger people we have a
real
true diversity
in our writers
and that's not by design we're not
plucking people out because they fit our
diversity metrics it's just that when
you select people on talent and merit
you naturally get a diverse range of
voices yeah there's a truly egalitarian
statement right yeah yeah but i mean if
you actually believe if you actually
believe that merit is
distributed throughout all human
populations let's say ethnicities races
gender sex all of that then why not just
choose on merit
and it's
i what i find is that if you select on
merit you will find
you'll find the diamond in the rough you
will find the writers who might not be
the best self-promoters the best at
attending the right parties and sucking
up to the right editors but if you if
you assess people's writing purely on
the quality and originality of their
ideas
um
[Music]
you you naturally get a broad range of
voices and
and that's something i'm really proud of
uh
and some of our younger writers include
people like um common hughes
and well he's not with us anymore but we
we were the first to publish him
uh rav of aurora
um
rob henderson he's not as young as
coleman but um
and he's an amazingly original thinker
and comes from a unit has a unique
background
um
another writer who i'm proud of
publishing is
an older writer
who
who is
emma's amazon warehouse worker and he
writes from a sort of a blue
collar working class perspective
he's very
he's very well read and has a very
a unique but important voice you know he
can contextualize
issues around class from
a real lived experience which is kind of
rare in journalism because journalism
has become such an elite occupation
particularly in the united states what's
his name
kevin mims
yeah well i've often found that the most
interesting people to speak with are
very smart people who haven't been
educated
haven't pursued a complete course of
higher education and they do the reading
on their own and they think in some ways
on their own and so when you encounter
them they have ideas that you don't hear
from anyone else yeah yeah
yeah and they're not affected by the
manners so so much of education is just
about internalizing the manners
of the upper middle class
and when you don't when you when you
have the ideas and the insights but
they're not
uh
they don't come with the baggage of all
of that upper class etiquette can be
quite interesting
and
they can be often quite quite humorous
often as well yeah of course so do you
regard quillette as a conservative or a
right-wing publication and or was that
your goal to begin with
uh no we're not conservative and we're
not right-wing
i'm not
particularly well i i would consider
myself a centrist
i'm conservative on some issues for sure
but not i'm not i don't come in a
conservative package and i'm quite high
in openness to experience so my
temperament is quite liberal
and how about conscientiousness uh
it could be higher
yeah well your room is clean so that's
that's part of that so yeah that that
that was a last-minute effort to just
push things out
i see i see
yeah no i'm not orderly at all i'm
industrious but my orderliness is
actually quite low
and uh i wasn't i never considered
myself a conservative until
i think the left became a bit became
uh
sort of hijacked by these social justice
ideas
yeah that's exactly what happened to me
as well yeah fundamentally i never
thought i was a conservative yeah yeah
you know who knows right yeah and but i
do think there are there are tremendous
insights in conservative philosophy and
you know as i've grown older and become
a parent and that kind of thing i
i appreciate the conservative
perspective a lot more than i used to
when i was younger
yeah well the conservative emphasis on
being very careful of unintended
consequences is definitely something
that that is wise and a necessary
counterpart to well
too much
in cautious originality let's say
yeah and and i think that the
conservatives
have it right when it comes to family
and relationships
uh
you know there's there's not a whole lot
of experimentation that one can do with
family structure without it going
haywire
yeah well it's a difficult thing to
manage
so
yeah
no it's like i i
i just can't see how it's possible to
to operate
as a single parent particularly it's
very very difficult to do that to work
and to raise children i mean i know
people do it and some people do it
extremely well but man
it's quite the damn job to manage it
well
and then you don't have someone around
constantly to talk to about your kids
which is also a problem i mean maybe you
have friends but that's not quite the
same thing so
that doesn't necessarily say that the
nuclear family is the only
option but we are pretty tightly pair
bonded as a species so yeah
no i think it's hard hard work but the
the the trip you know there's a there's
a big trade-off and
you know something our culture is not
very good at talking about is the
risk to children that is presented by
having unrelated
adults in their household
which is something i'm very aware of
being a mother
you know it's
you can't
when you've got little children running
around and they're creating messes and
dramas and they're acting up
you kind of need
the mail in the house to be biologically
related to them to protect them from
you know potential
aggravation
it's just you know i it seems to me a
uniquely dangerous
thing to do to your children to bring in
uh
men who don't have the instinct to care
for them but that's a separate issue
well it it yes yes and no i mean one
fact that has been pretty persistent in
in psychological investigation is the
fact that your a child is at a much
higher risk for physical abuse from a
step parent i think it's
i hate to say this but i think it's a
hundred fold it's something like that
but that that part might be wrong it's
been a while since i looked at it but
but the fact that it's a greatly
increased risk is not wrong and that is
definitely worth thinking about i mean
children push your buttons and that's
right
yes and and smart tough children
particularly do that um and so
well there has to be some inhibition of
that and
that
well we don't necessarily understand
exactly the relationship between the
love that inhibits that sort of thing
and direct genetic relationship
biological relationship but it's not
zero that's for sure yeah so those
people you listed as writers for
quillette they've gone on to have quite
the careers ravivora rob henderson uh
coleman hughes yeah so that's it's nice
to yeah it's exciting to be able to find
young people and to
uh to put them in positions where they
can succeed or to help them along that
path that's one thing i really liked
about being a professor with with
undergrads and graduate students when
that worked
yeah that's that's definitely the most
rewarding
aspect of the job and just giving people
a platform particularly when people are
going through a difficult time you know
we've published lots of articles
uh written by people who have been
uh
you know for want of a better term
cancelled at their
university or their workplace and
tortured is a better word really yeah
yeah and we had an article about the
the
similarities between cancer culture and
torture a few weeks ago on colette
so that that that's also been very
rewarding just being able to provide a
bit of cover for people and a bit of
moral support and giving
giving people a voice but potentially
when they're going through a rough time
in their lives um
so that's so you know that that comment
you made about
the most rewarding part of it being the
ability to find promising young people
and to open doors for them that's really
worth thinking about too you because
people have
it's easy for people to have a
stereotypical view of
let's say
the boss in an organization and there
are unreasonable bosses and foolish ones
and stupid ones obviously because for
obvious reasons but
i think that benevolent element is
extremely overlooked
yeah when people are thinking about how
organizations are structured because the
good people i know in organizations
think the way you do about what they're
doing that there's almost nothing more
fun than finding some young person who's
promising and and helping them
succeed in a variety of ways as people
and as
there's a new sitcom i don't know if
you've seen it it's quite interesting
called ted lasso it's about an american
football coach who goes to the u
to the uk to coach a soccer team
and it's a very very positive sitcom and
has very positive male and female
characters which is quite rare but it
focuses on that to a tremendous degree
and very effectively i think that it's
sort of in loco parentis and it makes
sense that that would be a motivation
because of course we love our children
and
most of the time and we would like to
facilitate their development and so why
wouldn't that be a natural source of of
reward it's an analog to that when
you're running an organization
well definitely and you know you would
know this as a clinical psychologist
that we often feel anxious and depressed
when we're focusing on ourselves too
much
and we're ruminating and we're thinking
about
you know when we get trapped in our own
mind in our own world and so
focusing on what we can do for others
is a really easy way to get out of that
trap
yeah well people depressed people use i
a lot yeah
yeah it's pronoun use you know how
important that is so but yes that that
constant use of self-referential
pronouns is a sign of depression and
that's an interesting observation we we
really don't know how much you have to
concentrate on other people
to be optimally situated in terms of
your emotional regulation
but too much self-focus that is clearly
associated with depression the causal
connection is hard to exactly establish
but
certainly people who who get depressed
do tend to
sever or lose a lot of their social
connections and that tends to make their
depression spiral
so
yeah i also when i was treating people
with social anxiety
you know one of the things that i
had them practice doing
was
paying more attention to other people
and i meant that like physically and
psychologically it's like if you start
getting anxious instead of avoiding and
falling into your
self-devouring thoughts
pay attention to the faces in particular
of the people you're interacting with
because you'll see with depressed and
anxious people they'll often avoid eye
contact they're trying to shield
themselves from what they see as
excessive evaluation right and they
think that evaluation is going to be
critical but if they would just look
then that's generally not true and
depressed and anxious people radically
overestimate the degree to which that's
true and then the other thing that
happens is that like if i'm not looking
at you
then i'm going to be awkward in my
conversation with you yeah and that's
going to make me anxious but if i look
at your face
well then i can see what you're doing
and how you're operating and then all
the automatic mechanisms i have that if
i'm reasonably socially skilled they
just kick in
some people lack that but most people
don't and so as long as they
initiate it through attention then away
they go
yeah it that that's a really good point
and it reminds me of um
the experience i had growing up so i
worked before i was
doing a psychology master's and before
i'd been doing quality i worked for 10
years from the age of
15 to 25 as a waitress
and i think that was actually probably
one of the best things that i've done in
my life because i mean for a range of
reasons
i remember being in my late teens and
early 20s and just having
all of these interactions with people
every every night well i wouldn't work
every night but you know every week
having hundreds of interactions small
interactions where you have to greet
people seat them take their order
attend to them during their dinner that
kind of thing and make sure everything's
okay i mean they're just tiny small
interactions but
any
any social anxieties immediately
immediately
becomes immediately extinct
and you learn confidence in just talking
to people in any kind of fear that you
might have as a young person who sort of
you know doesn't have high status or
hasn't had much experience in the world
that's that all melts away just from
having a service job and i think that
having a service job is is one of the
best things a young person can do
particularly if they suffer did you
enjoy it oh yeah i loved it yeah i
worked in restaurants for years i
started when i was 14 i i worked in
restaurants on and off until i was
probably 19 or so for about so for about
five years that was mostly as a
short order cook and so forth or i
started as a dishwasher but it's
tremendously social occupation
yeah
yeah yeah i loved it and and in one
restaurant in particular i worked there
with friends
and it was a rude shock to me to
graduate university and then get an
office job
after working in a restaurant because
it was so boring by comparison and so um
to me it just seemed like it wasn't real
work working in an office i worked with
this guy named scotty kyle and he was
about 34 years old and he had been an
alcoholic and he had most of his teeth
punched out in fights he was a rough guy
but he'd stopped drinking by the time i
was working with him and he was a great
practical joker and so the best and he
was always playing jokes on the
waitresses and they liked him he wasn't
mean he was very very funny and so they
got along with him really well and the
best joke he ever pulled i thought was
we had a cooler that you could walk into
and in the cooler there was a white
uh bucket that we kept sell it in in ice
water so that we could just scoop it out
and
serve a fresh salad pretty
straightforwardly the waitresses would
go back and do that it was their job to
to serve the salads and to get them out
of the cooler so scotty stuffed himself
into the cooler which was only about
this wide
and he put his hands in the ice water
and then
the the lights were off back there too
and so when the waitress came back into
the into the room where the cooler
wasn't open she put put her put the
scoop in to get the salad and he grabbed
her hands and both his hands which were
ice cold well i did she
i was about three rooms away but you
could definitely hear her scream and i
think you could hear it through the
whole restaurant it was extraordinarily
funny and so that's one of the things i
really liked about working-class jobs
actually is that they they had a human
constant yeah and the constant humor
that that was happening that was
absolutely yeah
so so back to quillette
so
why did quillette succeed so well do you
think what did you do right and i mean
timing is something right but still
you have to be in the right place
you were in the right place at the right
time and so
what happened do you think
uh well i i'm
i'm pretty good at spotting talent and
so i
i spotted a couple of
uh writers i was on twitter
and i saw people
writing
for their own blogs one of them was
jamie palmer who's now
sort of second in charge he's a senior
editor in london he was writing for his
own book and i remember reading his
prose and just thinking
why isn't this guy
working for the sunday times like his
prose was so beautiful and so um had
such a complexity
that was so interesting
so i could see unexploited talent
and
i mean when i when i created colette it
was in late 2015 it was just before or
happened simultaneously with the
creation of the heterodox academy
and i was actually
you know i was a huge fan of jonathan
height
prior to beginning quillette and i had
met um
a psychologist called lee justin who had
come out to australia to give a talk at
a psychology symposium and i went to i
went to meet him and and talk to him
and we talked a lot about the left-wing
bias in psychology in particular social
psychology and that was we should talk
more about that
yeah so that was fascinating to me
because
you know i had been studying psychology
for a long time i loved psychology
i like my favorite aspects of psychology
are the the sort of things that you look
at such as personality and individual
differences but it was really uh amazing
to me to discover that
social psychology might have
a huge replication problem because they
had this political bias sort of baked
into their studies
and so i went to talk to lee justin
about this
and this this i mean this was six years
ago but it was before
the problems in academia had become
very widely known and talked about
and so
i was fascinated i was fascinated by
this idea that
a particular area of
science could be corrupted by political
bias and then i wanted to write an
article about this particular topic and
i thought there's no publication that
will have me
because the publications that focus on
science such as scientific american or
even the guardian they they do they
publish on scientific topics
they're over they linked
and then publications that
uh might be interested in publishing
articles that
um
contest some left-wing narratives
they're not going to be particularly
interested in science so i needed a
publication that could have
that was interested in analysis and
scientific rigor
but was also
going to challenge left-wing narratives
and i thought that such a public such a
publication didn't actually exist so i
had to create my own
and some of the first articles that i
published were by academics who
uh
in either in their research or in their
career
come up against left-wing ideology in
academia or either in there so so i had
a particular interest in
[Music]
sex differences so sex differences in
psychology you know there's a lot as you
know there's a lot of empirical evidence
that
uh men and women are
the same psychologically we have
different career preferences we have
different sexual psychology but it's
difficult to talk about these issues in
mainstream journalism
yeah
of course and
so i wanted a publication that would
explore these issues and i invited
academics to i knew who had interests in
either evolutionary psychology or
behavioral genetics to come and write
for me
and
a couple of my early a couple of the
early essays that i published were just
very good and they kind of went viral as
much as you know viral for it for a high
intellectual publication and
it just took off from there we we just
built up a social media following
okay so you you point to two factors say
so one is that
you
like to spot talent and you actually
could do it
and you also believe that talent exists
so that's kind of helpful for that if it
does happen to be the case that talent
does exist and then
when talented people are having
difficulty let's say being published
somewhere because of their
the tenor of their viewpoint whatever
that happens to be that does create
exactly the kind of opportunity that you
just described right because then you
have this pool of talent that isn't
being utilized that you can capitalize
on so to speak while also aiding in the
development of those people then that
issue that you brought up there that
that that's part of your ability to spot
what's not right you know the fact that
you caught on to that bias in psychology
so early in your psychological
progression i mean you you happen to
talk to people who knew this but
still that's quite the realization you
know i really didn't
understand that until i had been a
psychologist probably for
at least 15 years a professor now i was
i did my phd in a more biological area
and then i was a personality
psychologist and it doesn't have the
same kind of bias but then i started
looking into the literature on
authoritarian personality and
authoritarianism and all i found was
this insistence
that there was no such thing as
left-wing authoritarianism yeah and i
thought what the hell is this how can we
possibly assume as a science social
psychology which is not much of a
science as far as i'm concerned by the
way but how can we
state so bluntly that there's no such
thing as left-wing authoritarianism and
this the authoritarian scale that had
been used by social psychologists was
only right-wing authoritarianism and i
thought well what about the communists i
mean did nobody notice in social
psychology that there were communist
dictators what were those people
well and that now and then it's worse
than that that's bad enough now i had a
graduate student who
we started to do research on left-wing
authoritarianism but that by the time
that got off the ground fundamentally
things exploded around me and i stopped
working as a professor i couldn't do
that anymore but the other thing that's
really
horrible horrible horrible is the
implicit association test oh yeah yeah
now and that that and that left wing
issue is dead relevant here so yeah you
know i'll tell you a story this is a
good story i think okay
so mazarin banaji who is one of the uh
inventors of the iat
and
who hasn't
protested against its misuse
to the degree that the other creators of
the iat have and also nowhere nearly as
much
is quite left in her viewpoint so that's
point number one point number two i saw
her when i was at harvard she came to
deliver a talk she's there now but she
wasn't when i was there she came to
deliver a talk about the iat she talked
about bias implicit bias and so i think
i asked her this question she was
delivering a talk to the faculty and the
graduate student so
i said what's the difference between
implicit bias and categorization
and she didn't really have an answer to
that and i thought wait a second
this is an important issue
you're equating
categorization
with implicit bias yeah
well
let's call that a pronounce sin on the
left and here's the fundamental idea as
far as i can tell is that
well it isn't obvious how we categorize
that's partly foucault's criticism of
category structures and there's
something to that because categorization
is extremely difficult
but to leap from that to say that
categorization as such is say nothing
but bias is yeah it's insane it's so
it's it's it's so shallow and so wrong
and so dangerously wrong well it's not
surprising that the iat has gone out
into the world from social psychology
and just
wreaked devastating havoc and i should
also say as a research and clinical
psychologist
that
if a clinical psychologist used that
test in a clinical setting they would be
in deep trouble because it's nowhere
near valid enough or reliable enough to
be used for diagnostic purposes period
the end well they i mean they i mean you
would think there'd be some sanctions on
harvard or the academics putting
making the test available to the public
on their web so so the iit is available
on a harvard
not diagnosis
yeah so there's some disclaimer that you
know it can be used can't be used for
research can't be used as a diagnostic
tool because it doesn't have validity
and reliability but it's available on a
harvard website so that all of these
consultants who are paid yes absolutely
per hour can have their workers take it
and you know yes it comes with the
prestige of harvard yeah and so de facto
defect that's right de facto it's a
clinical diagnostic test but it's not
mark it's not it's not promoted directly
as such right and it isn't licensed
clinicians that are using it yeah it's
extraordinarily
horrible shameful
now i think it should be used for
research purposes because the question
of to what degree
implicit bias
power differential even might affect
categorization is a perfectly reasonable
question but but to equate them
thoughtlessly is it's abs it's
absolutely inexcusable intellectually
what i find interesting is
the research on stereotype accuracy and
from the reading that i've done
so this is lee justin's
work he has found that
stereotypes do tend to be
reasonably accurate they're not it's
just a heuristic we have yeah well
that's the issue the heuristic issue is
exactly the issue almost all our
perceptions and categories are
heuristics they're yeah they're
shortcuts because we can't see
everything so everything we perceive is
a heuristic
i mean the very objects we see are
perceptual heuristics exactly but what's
really interesting about justin's work
is that
he finds that we
because of our mental shortcuts and
heuristics we
we can make snap judgments about an
individual or about a person but
according to the group that they belong
to but as soon as we get more data about
that individual the stereotype drops
away
so we're very good at updating our
perceptions of individuals according to
the data that comes in and that makes
sense okay so partly what we do like we
have all of us have complete maps of the
world
you might say well how can we because we
don't know everything well the answer is
we just use low resolution
representations
and so like there's you know that uh
mongolia exists
but if i asked you
everything you knew about mongolia it
would unless you're a specialist it
wouldn't take you long to exhaust your
knowledge yeah so you have a
representation just like the
representation you have of a helicopter
you know
you could draw your representation of a
helicopter it would be like a circle
with a couple of lines on it and a rotor
you know that's a helicopter it's like
no it's not not at all you know but
okay so
and what happens is that when we use a
low resolution
representation when a high-res
representation is necessary we hit
errors
yeah and then we update and we and we
differentiate the map yeah and and
and that's that there isn't any
difference between that in thinking that
that's essentially that's what you do
when you're thinking but but because you
have to have shorthand
when you're ignorant
you have to rely on something yeah and
so yeah of course and you know i think
there are times when people refuse to
update their stereotypes you know
because it takes effort and so
but that that's a separate issue yeah
yeah that's right
yeah so the the the
lack of left-wing authoritarianism is is
interesting i wonder if that
body of research has been updated in the
last couple of years i haven't looked at
it for a while but when i did look at it
i remember a an academic at i think
maybe nyu called john jost he was very
resistant to the idea that there was
left such a thing as left-wing
authoritarianism and i think he argued
that um
conservativism was
almost a form of false consciousness oh
yes they they have yes yes that's the
scale it's something like system
justification yeah that's the one yeah
that's it yeah yeah so if you that's
exactly it and it's it's again social
psychologists playing at clinical
pathologization
yeah that's deeply embedded in that in
that social in that uh system
justification theory literature it's
like well if you if you're patriotic
well there's something wrong with you
yeah no yeah
yes
yeah
yeah so i don't think that anything has
been updated on this on on the end of
investigation into left-wing
authoritarianism and it's too bad you
know because it isn't exactly obvious to
me that when the left goes wrong it goes
wrong exactly the same way the right
goes wrong when it goes wrong yeah
so i i think the right might have more
of a proclivity to clump together in a
unitary fashion partly because i think
it's easier to do that on the right you
know if it's true that those on the
right are more conscientious and dutiful
and lower in openness that means they're
not as diverse in their opinions and and
and range of of interests let's say and
so in principle it would be easier to
unite them and that might be an
advantage you know there's an advantage
to rapid unification just like there's a
an
advantage to diversity of ideation which
covers more territory but is slower and
harder to organize
so and the fact that the research isn't
balanced
to investigate both ends means well that
we're ignorant about these things when
we shouldn't be
yes and we should be studying it and we
should be studying the impact or the
the relationship of social media
particularly to both left-wing and
right-wing authoritarianism i have a
there's a an article that um
rob henderson wrote with
another um
grad student called vincent haranam
uh he we published it a couple of years
ago and it's called political moderates
are lying
and the
thesis was that
in our online groups and online tribes
over time
those who are more fanatical or those
who are more dogmatic in their views
come to dominate the discussion
and they intimidate
the moderates in the group
and the effect that that has is over
time it pulls the moderates over to the
the more extreme pole of the group or
the more extreme pole of the ideology
that is held
and this
similar to what jonathan height was you
suppose it's because is it because the
more extreme types are more willing to
use punishment in service of their
certainty
so that would be hard on the moderates
right yeah yeah i think that would be
part of it and certainly there's and and
the more extreme voices
uh
do more
so you get into this moral grandstanding
and this performative sort of behavior
and they impose more costly signals on
themselves than others
so
and this is this happens on in groups
that are both left wing and right-wing
and i'm more familiar with the dynamics
on the left because we've covered it a
lot
at colette but if you've got like an
artistic community
and
uh
so so we published an article about the
implosion of the boston pride parade so
this there's an organization that is
pro-lgbt
etc
and a
a group of young activists come in and
say we're going to take over your
organization now your the boston pride
parade has to be about black trans lives
mattering it's going to be about black
trans lives not just about lgbt so they
want to narrow the issue down to
something very tiny and specific
and then they want to impose
that belief system on the rest of the
group and now the moderates in the group
are thinking well i want to support i
want to be part of the boston pride
group i want to go and march for lgbt
people and and
lesbian and gay rights and transgender
rights i want to be involved in that but
i can't sign on to these
quite
extreme demands and and this
this group of activists wanted to sort
of
pivot the the pride march away from just
lgbt and towards black trans lives had a
suite of demands where they had to ign
you know the the uh the white people of
the group had to acknowledge that they
were colonialists and they had stolen
from the native peoples and they had to
um rally against gentrification so all
this whole suite of sort of
pseudo-marxist demands which came along
in this package
and the moderates just give up they're
either intimidated or powered into
silence
leave the group or just cave in and um i
can kind of you might also wonder if the
moderates have better things to do on
average yeah you know you know what i
mean if you're so imagine you're
moderate in your life and you're kind of
distributed your interests are kind of
distributed along around a number of
things your family you have a job etc
etc and so you're you're tangentially or
involved with the group but when push
comes to shove well if someone's getting
hostile and it's starting to cause you a
lot of grief and misery then it's easy
enough to bow out and absolutely that's
that's exactly right and and the the
concern i have is that i'm seeing so
this is sort of like a deranging dynamic
that is now happening where tiny
minorities of fanatics
are pulling
their respective communities and their
ideological tribes away from the center
and it's not just happening on the left
i'm seeing it more and more happening on
the right and i do you think social
media is do you think what social media
is doing is speeding that up and making
it easier right yeah because it's it's
not that easy if you're a bully let's
say an ideologically committed to bully
to actually find people and bully them
but online you can do that because it's
so efficient you can do that
extremely quickly and with very many
people and you can unite that's the
other thing is you can unite fanatics
even if they're rare
statistically so you know in a small
town maybe you could find two fanatics
and what the hell are they going to do
but online well then there's a group and
then that would also mean that the
fanatics are more likely to overestimate
how popular their ideas actually are
because there's a biased sampling issue
for example we'll say
yeah and but also fanatics can attract
quite large followings on social media
and particularly
if they focus on one issue
so if you're
so a very
very effective strategy for being an
activist
on social media using social media as
one of your main or your main tool
of engagement is to just pick one issue
and focus on it and just repeat it over
and over and over again and that is i
mean i'm not saying all activism is bad
by any means but it's
it can
it can create a community
that can become fanatical basically
which is not i'm not so sure that that
activism isn't just bad
all together you know well it obviously
the idea that
you
need to pay attention to your
institutions and that sometimes they
need criticism and reform it's like
obviously
institutions ossify
and they become corrupt and everyone has
to be alert to that and there are steps
you can and should take and are morally
obligated i think to take
but the thing about activism is that
it's almost always predicated on the
idea that
you're right you're morally superior and
you've identified the people who are
wrong and to me that's one step away
from mob and it's one step away from
punishment and one of the things that
upholds me and makes me ashamed
in relationship to the universities is
that
universities are pretty good at
teaching young people that being an
activist is a good thing and i'm not so
sure at all that it's a good thing i
think it's pseudo
responsibility especially because it
always comes with the easy
identification of just who the enemy is
that's exactly right no i think you're
right and i think that if you're going
to attack if you're going to be on the
attack you have to also build it's your
responsibility and it's your duty to
build so i
uh you know well you built an
alternative that's what you did
yeah yeah and i think you know if you're
going to attacking
our institution institutions you know i
have a lot of problems with
establishment institutions but you can't
just attack them
what what are we going to have left when
we've got no institutions we've got to
have
uh new institutions
go to start building them now well we
could have rubble and everyone could be
equal in the rubble that's happened many
many many times
and that's the risk that's rising that's
you know that that that's why i think
attack you know attacking institutions
has to go hand in hand with building new
ones and and lots of people you know i i
know quite a few people who are trying
to build new institutions but um
yeah i agree that there's something
about social media and social media
enabled activism that
makes uh finding an out group
dehumanizing the out group and attacking
them very easy well okay let's dive into
that for a minute okay so
how many times have you sworn at
somebody when you're walking down the
street versus how many times have you
sworn at someone when you're in your car
and they're in their car
i don't think i've sworn at anyone ever
okay well okay well then you're very
you're much more polite than me let's
say but
it's much more probable when there's a
barrier like that that that people will
manifest aggressive behavior you know we
don't know exactly what inhibits
aggressive behavior but one thing that
does is rather rather close personal
proximity real proximity now when you
take the person and you
you place them in a shell let's say
that's a car you place yourself in the
shell well all of those cues those
subtle and complex cues aren't there
and so
online well every you don't even have an
avatar you only have your hypothetical
fantasy about the person that you're
attacking you don't even know them
yeah so and we don't know what that does
to people at all i mean we see some of
that on twitter and we have no i if this
hypothesis that you laid out is true you
know is if there's
a tendency
for those who are more committed to
dominate certain types of institutions
because the moderates bail out and then
if it's also true that that's sped along
by social media which is a possibility
not a certainty but it could be and then
it's also more easier to dehumanize
people in in social media circles if
particularly if you're so inclined and
maybe even if you're not
then well that can be a perfect storm i
mean i just read an article by jonathan
height today where he i've been noticing
what seems to be developing into
something like a runaway positive
feedback loop in
the political landscape particularly in
the us and you know i i spend a fair bit
of time thinking about what a mental
disorder actually was and the most
common
uh description now i think it's from
wakefield i think is that it's
the it's the deviation of a complex
mental function from its evolutionarily
signified path and i don't like that at
all because it's very difficult to
specify the evolutionarily signified
path and it it violates the is ought
distinction right just because that's
how it evolved assuming
why did the hand evolve you know it does
a lot of things and yeah okay but
one of the things i did notice that a
lot of
mental disorders are positive feedback
loops depression's a good example so you
start feeling bad well and then you you
reduce your social contacts and you're
less effective at work well that makes
you feel worse well then you you're more
irritable so you start fighting with
your wife or your husband that makes you
feel worse and then away it goes down
spiraling downhill
anxiety you start to avoid that's how
agrophobia develops
alcoholism you drink to get rid of your
hangover well positive feedback loop now
not every mental disorder is a positive
feedback loop but
plenty of them seem to be they have that
element and you have to fight figure out
how to stop that spiral from continuing
well we're getting we're getting into a
situation imagine this
domination of the radical groups on both
sides and they have an outsized voice an
outsize
you
ability to utilize punishment
effectively and now they're upsetting
the hell out of each other yeah and so
they're more and more set in their ways
and now the moderates are pulling over
to that side
this is the process height outlines it
in part in this in this
an article that that he i believe he
released it today um it's october 30th
by the way this will be put up later um
and he thinks that at least in part this
was driven by facebook like
and twitter adoption of like you know
this is we were talking about
conservativism and liberalism and you
know one of the things conservatives
always say to liberals is don't be
thinking that your stupid invention is
only doing what you think it is i am
yeah right that's the justice and spence
concept
yes and if you've done any sort of
laboratory experiments you get very very
sensitive to that because
things don't go the way you predict they
will right you're with your stupid
hypothesis and so
who knows what the like button did
facebook is a it's not nothing right
it's oh it's just a like button no no
it's it's like 300 million like buttons
yeah
oh i think we vastly underestimate the
impact that social media is having on
our societies and political culture and
you know people will say oh it's it's
simply magnifying what's already there
and that might be true but what if what
if what's already there is quite fragile
what if the united states was on the
pathway to
extreme political polarization i mean
it's not a small thing to speed that up
like it's a very dangerous thing to
speed that process up yeah well it's
harder to think it's harder to think
things through and put on the brakes
when it's happening really really fast
and you're not sure why you know like i
i put a fair bit of the
responsibility for this
mess that we're in on faculty members at
universities who let the administrators
take over by
cow towing 300 times
over a 30-year period so and then what
happened so the administrators took over
the universities and then the diei
people took over the administrators and
yeah well i know that's an
oversimplification but but
but
and then these ideas these poisonous
ideas just away they go out into the
culture and yeah
and i think
height is probably correct when he says
that these bad ideas so we're talking
about the postmodernism
the you know intersectionality all of
that
those rubbish ideas
they would have stayed enclosed within
the walls of these quite
marginalized university departments they
would have stayed enclosed
it
captioning not available
tool where they could go into
institutions and claim hey we can we can
ferret out your prejudice
it's like yeah yeah
yeah i mean so it's not inter it's not
wholly because of social media but it's
certainly allowed bad ideas to spread
very quickly and and we could see that
with um
i mean there's there's so many yeah
there's the pandemic we should really be
worried about
yeah i mean so one example of of
bad i so there's there's two things that
i'll talk about i'll mention bad ideas
spreading but also social contagion of
mental disorders so
i mean and and i guess they're both
they're fairly similar so
you know when george
floyd died in
the united states there were riots that
spread across the united states
you know i think the more damage was
done
in the riots that occurred in 2020 that
had been that had
they were the worst riots in 50 years or
something like that in the united states
it barely had any mainstream media
coverage
if any coverage at all and i i think
there hasn't even been been a thorough
investigation of
how these rights occurred
how uh how much damage was done how many
people died as a result because the
murder rate has spiked in the u.s
the police have pulled back from their
policing
um
so you know this this outrage that
occurred from a single video clip of
someone you know obviously the murder
was horrific and you know it was a
horrifying thing to view i remember
feeling absolutely disgusted like just
horrified watching the footage but it's
gone viral and it sparked these riots
around a whole nation well we also you
know you think about what's happening
with regard to our heuristics as a
consequence of that you know because
we're kind of wired to assume that if we
see something violent
that means that the probability of
violence in our local environment is
quite high because otherwise we wouldn't
see it and so it isn't obvious that our
emotional systems can look at something
like that and simultaneously say well
remember this is a pool of 300 million
it's like 300 million how many is that
like yeah you don't know you're you're
kind of wired for 200 not 300 million
exactly yeah but the remarkable thing
was how
uh
huge
demonstrations in support of black lives
matter happened all over europe
and they even there were some matches
even in australia in the middle of a
pandemic
and you had tens of thousands of people
marching in the middle of a pandemic
in support of black lives matter
in the uk they had black lives matter
marches
where people were were chanting hands up
don't shoot
now the police in the uk don't have guns
right so
we could look at that psychologically
you know and we could say well you know
on the positive side you watched the
george floyd video and you had an
empathic reaction and a reaction of
disgust and you know we could say kudos
for that because it's an indication of
the operation of a moral instinct and we
could also say the same thing about you
know beyond cynicism about the these
demonstrations everywhere yeah one thing
you can say about that is well people
are concerned enough about
inequality like genuinely oppressive
inequality so that even something like
that
will trigger it and so but but then we
have to
detail out the other side of the
argument which is well
how do you separate that from
the kind of overreaction that will tear
down structures that are actually
helpful to people and so well now it's
defund the police
well yeah and you know
maybe not maybe that's not the right
response to that video and it's
certainly not obviously the right
response and
were more people killed by defund the
police like how many people are killed
by defund the police we don't know we
don't know but it's certainly not zero
that's right
yeah i mean i shouldn't
i shouldn't uh
suggest that marching in support of uh
you know i don't think you were i don't
i don't think you were i think that the
point i was trying to make was simply
that
the political movements can go viral
and they can spread out like you know
it's obviously an american issue police
brutality and and and the race issues
that are uh inherent in in american
culture you know that's obviously very
specific to america
and
you know you can't you just simply
cannot graft american race relations
onto a country like australia or the uk
or europe you know we don't have the
same history we haven't had slavery
completely different cultures
so it was quite eye-opening and um
surprising to me to see how easily this
political movement spread and how this
americanization
occurred all over the world
without much
you know people just got swept up in it
with this sort of mood affiliation you
even had epidemiologists
joining
didn't happen in australia but i know in
the united states even epidemiologists
came down and joined
the movement to support black lives
matter and and said you know these
marches uh you know racism is a public
health crisis it's worse than the
western coving
which is just
it's that's like temporary insanity for
an epidemiologist to say that so i mean
it's also it's also frightening because
it means that certain political
viewpoints are acceptable during a
pandemic and others aren't and because
they're of such critical importance you
see that happening in the uk right now
with climate change summit yeah
yeah exactly they've they've uh they've
they've liberalized
travel restrictions on so-called red
countries as long as you're an attendee
of the climate change and
the claimant change summit and that's
absolutely horrifying to me it's like oh
i see so because you share you all share
a particular
political take on a particular issue
that's so important all of a sudden that
you're in a different legal category and
you don't think that's a that's a
dangerous precedent or you don't care so
you're either stupid or malevolent one
of the two
and you know i don't like to use such
harsh words but that's not acceptable
period that's right yeah absolutely
and uh you know and
when we've got such low trust in
institutions as it is
to be coming out with double standards
according to political affiliation is
just ridiculous
but then the other thing
that is
scary about social media is um
the is conte social contagion of mental
disorders
so
we know uh we're aware now that
certain proportion of young girls
who are identifying as gender dysphoric
and
trying uh attempting to become
transgender
we're aware now that
there is such a thing as
rapid onset gender dysphoria so there's
a book called discovery of the
unconscious which is a great book
henry ellenberger it's it's i was given
that book by
a
psychiatrist at
um the douglas hospital who was my
supervisor and french guy maurice
dancier a very distinguished psych
psychiatrist and he said
this is the psychoanalytic bible
discovery of the unconscious and the
first it's about
that thick and it covers jung freud
adler it's great book and but the first
300 pages is a history of
pre-psychoanalytic thought and part of
that is a historical survey of contagion
right and so so the multiple personality
disorder for example has cycled through
about 300 years
and there there there are there are
people who are temperamentally
susceptible to such contagion they're
likely the same people who are
relatively easily hypnotizable
yeah it's likely associated with high
openness by the way right okay and
you could also imagine that if you're
high in openness it's harder for you to
catalyze and specify an identity and
you're more diverse in your inner life
maybe even your emotional life and so
right and then
there's confusion here too that we
should talk about as psychologists so
sex and gender you know and i've been
accused of just
saying this that those are identical but
i know they're not
because there is a lot of personality
variability on top of biological sex and
it isn't
like
it isn't a particularly rare woman
who has essentially the same temperament
as the average man
my suspicions are it's probably about
one woman in 10. now it would depend on
exactly how you
made the cutoffs you know but i don't if
it's not 10 maybe it's 5 i don't care
it's somewhere in that range and the
same can be said for men and so it's
perfectly possible for a boy to have a
temperament that's more like a girl but
that does not mean that he's in the
wrong body
that's the raw like that's a pretty
radical solution for a problem that's
essentially a consequence of normal
temperamental variability and so there
is some utility in separating out gender
from sex if you think of gender as
personality which i think is the
appropriate way to think about it
scientifically but i knew back when the
when i got entangled in my first
political conflict i thought
all this mucking about with gender
categories is going to confuse and hurt
way more people that it's going to help
and part of this is this
problem of contagion of confusion yes so
all adolescents really need that that's
really what they need is more confusion
about
sex and gender when they're 13.
that's just perfect
yeah it's freedom yes like yeah freedom
yeah right yeah
and it wouldn't be it wouldn't be an
issue i mean there's nothing androgyny
has been around for
hundreds thousands of years i mean
there's there's ancient
sculptures of androgynous figures i mean
ancient cultures understood androgyny
and there's plenty of historical
president for the idea that androgynous
personality is actually more of an ideal
there's lots of speculation in christian
mysticism about the androgyny of christ
yeah that's right and you know i
i'm not
i when i was a teenager i used to look
up to androgynous um
celebrities like well david bowie was a
little bit before my time but he was
androgynous i used to
and
yeah i mean it wasn't it was an ideal to
emulate
and to be its tomboy was
considered cool but you would never
consider
medical
intervention you would never consider
hormone treatment or
modifying your body to how about
mastectomy
or how about how about uh how about
attempting to make a penis out of the
musculature in your arm
you know penises are actually quite
complex it's not that easy to take your
arm and turn it into one
and certainly not without a tremendous
amount of cost and trouble and then well
and then and then
let's just imagine that you were wrong
and confused just for a moment
you know and the in that the contrary
argument is well you better deal with
this early it's like yeah you really
know that do you you're so bloody sure
about that are you
well they can
the emotional blackmail that activists
have used uh has been you know
this argument that if kids don't get
this early intervention then they're at
higher risk of suicide well we have
absolutely no idea
whether
um you know we don't you know
suicidal
suicidal ideation or um distress is not
easily disentangled from confusion
around your identity it's not clear that
it's simply transphobia or being trapped
no no it's clear that it's no it's clear
that it's simply not it's not simple
first of all as you just pointed out
it's actually unbelievably complicated
so
difficult things yep yeah well there's a
there's a paper that's been recently um
published by lisa lippman who
did the original exploratory research on
rapid onset gender dysphoria and she's
gone and interviewed a hundred d
transitioners which is a lot of i think
she just talked to barry weiss about
that okay yeah well her paper well she
interviewed dear transitioners so people
who have
transitioned gender
and who now regret it
and
there's a couple of patterns that stand
out one one
uh pattern that stands out is that often
people felt the need to transition after
some trauma had happened to them so they
experienced the trauma
and then another pattern that stands out
is that
these individuals were sort of sold
trans gender translation as a solution
to all of their problems yeah yeah i i
think i read the paper i think that one
of the most common claims of the d
transitioners was that they were
tremendously ill-informed about the full
consequences of their actions by the
relevant medical professionals and and
then we could also say it's certainly
possible that the relevant medical
professionals are too terrified to fully
inform them
well it's their job i mean yeah i know
i'm not an excuse but but it is but it
but but it's it's still worth noting
because you can
understand sexual transition in children
i mean his life was torn into shreds and
he's an apolitical guy he's just a
researcher and he's a good one as well
yeah and so the this fear
you know you you can say well
you're a professional it's your duty to
stand up regardless of the fear but
but
when there's that much pressure even
people who stand up are going to be
inclined to speak a lot less than they
might otherwise yeah
i had i've had a press council complaint
made against me before an article i
wrote for the australian on transgender
issues
and it wasn't upheld
but
anytime a journalist in australia wants
to write about
uh issues particularly to do with
medical intervention
and gender dysphoric kids they are
subject to
complaints press counsel complaints well
and if you're if you're an md or a
psychologist
if someone takes a complaint against you
to your college especially if that
college has been increasingly dominated
by activists you are so screwed
yeah like i i had one client just cause
me just an
unbelievable
amount of misery
and well because you can hijack the
whole bureaucracy as a weapon
yeah and so yeah yeah and that's what
these activists do and they're very good
at it and they you know they only need
to have a couple of successes under
their belt and they have a whole system
for attacking people well we have human
rights commissions in canada which are a
quasi-judicial entity with with
increasing power and that's a perfect
weapon for any activist who's motivated
to use it
and that whoever the target of the human
rights commission is you can kiss five
years of their life goodbye and there's
a high probability that they're going to
be found guilty regardless of what they
did it's really it's it's truly
appalling especially given that it's
happening under the ages hypothetically
of human rights
and and the ability to give informed
consent
[Music]
and this this is just one this is an
example of how fanatics
hijack
institutions which you would
have previously thought were fairly
centrist and moderate so it's you know
this the transgender activism issue is
is a perfect example because it's a tiny
like transgender activists are a
minority of transgender people
who are a tiny minority anyway so it's
just like the the smallest number of
people creating
an extreme amount of havoc
uh
and it's it's a perfect example of how
this how a tiny intolerant minority
can
uh
basically
dominate others
using all of the all of the new tools
that we have today social media uh
you know bureaucratic complaints
uh
mobbing that type of thing
so to let's go back to quillette
directly for for
for for a bit um
what's the growth pattern like are you
still are you still in an ascending
on an ascending trajectory how is
quillet doing and what are your plans
for the future
uh
we our revenue is growing but i our
traffic has
been steady for the last
couple of years
year or so so our revenue is increasing
and our subscriptions are increasing but
our traffic isn't
um our
plan for next year
is to broaden into publishing physical
books
and i want to
focus more on the academic audience i
want to
recruit more heterodox because what i've
noticed in the past five years since
doing equilibrium is that media has
diversified it a bit so when i started
uh
mains you know the main the mainstream
media was quite uh stale
there were just you know these big
corporate
um entities that were too timid to touch
controversial issues i feel like the
media land
is much more diverse and varied now and
that's got a lot to do with sub stack
the innovations of that newsletter
technology
so
i i think there's
more heterodoxy
more variety more diversity in media
however i don't think
one can say the same thing about
academia academia is still
stuck in this stagnant
uh sort of
decaying kind of it needs rejuvenation
it means well if you're right there
should be an opportunity there just like
there was with quillette so yeah
and i feel like academic publishing
is
ripe for disruption and i don't want to
become an academic publisher per se but
i would like to publish
books
written by interesting scholars who may
find it difficult to get published by
traditional academic publishers because
their ideas are too
challenging or potentially too
controversial
great maybe you'll find a psychologist
who can publish a good book with some
research in it about left-wing
authoritarianism yeah that would be that
that would be ideal
yeah so that's what i'd like to do i
feel like you know media media is on the
right path
there's a lot of
uh brave journalists like barry weiss is
one there's others who are
really pushing back against the group
think that has existed in journalism
but i think there's more work to be done
in academia is and i can't i'm not an
academic i'm not going to go into the
universities but i can at least give a
platform
to
renegade or dissident academics who find
it difficult to get their ideas out to a
broader public and get published in that
kind of thing
so that's where i'm
moving so sort of i i never really
wanted to
i never wanted quillette to become like
a mass market
product we
our interest isn't necessarily to
capture the largest audience possible
but we do want to provide
high quality content for a niche
audience and i feel like our niche is
very engaged
how would you define that niche do you
think
well um
certainly our readers uh you know it's
interesting um
if you can if you look at the
demographic sort of i don't do a lot of
digital analytics but you can see some
demographic variables
and
for some somehow google can pick up
where people trend politically and at
the majority of our readers describe
themselves as independents
so they're in the center
and then i would also describe our
readers as being
more analytical than the average is
there a sex difference
yes so our audience is 70
70 30 male to female
yeah well i wonder i wonder if that's uh
actually reflective of quillette or
reflective of the gender difference in
preference for fiction versus
non-fiction because females prefer
fiction and males prefer non-fiction on
average and i don't know if maybe that
would account for a you know a pretty
decent chunk of that 70 30.
probably and we don't publish
um lifestyle content and i think women
must be
overwhelmingly the main consumers of
lifestyle content
so i mean
it's interesting what you were saying
about variations in personality so you
know i'm overwhelmingly interested in
uh politics and sort of big um
philosophical ideas which and that
you know
i i tend to find writers and readers who
are interested in those things
tend to be more male than female
um so it you know
well you see an openness there's a
gender difference too is that
men are more are higher in intellect
which is interesting ideas and women are
higher in
prop openness proper which is a subset
of openness to experience and that has
more to do with the i would say that the
more yeah exactly exactly the more
artistic end let's say of of that
intellectual predilection now the gender
difference there isn't huge and women
and men don't differ that much in
openness total but if you break it down
into its two major aspects you do get
that difference so it's interesting yeah
yeah yes that probably goes along a
little bit with that male proclivity to
be more interested in things than people
compared to women and so that might be a
manifestation of that in the openness
domain
i think that one of the things that has
gone wrong with journalism up until very
recently
is a
a lack of analysis and a lack of rigor
so if you look at
um
if you look at a paper like the new york
times
i mean i'm not a scholar i'm not a
historian of the new york times i don't
really know what the what their articles
were like 30 years ago but at least in
the last 10 years since i've been
reading them the last 15 years
you see more
arguments made from
uh you see more emotional reasoning and
more sort of narrative storytelling
and
i mean
this might be great for fiction
but it's not great for
objective you know for for journalism
which is meant to be an objective
empirical profession
and um
and i think you know i mean i don't know
what the gender ratio is of journalists
but probably there are more women now
in journalism than there ever has been
you are not afraid of causing trouble
are you
i just
i i am
but i i think about this i think about
how
you know in certain occupations you
might have had a gender imbalance before
where there has been more men than women
but what happens when there's more women
than men like what we don't have
what happens to the depression yeah we
have we have we also don't know what
happens to the political structure when
women are hyper involved we have
absolutely no idea because that's a that
that's only been happening for
well
a hundred years at the at the at the
maximum but let's say 50 really
since the second world war i think
that's when it really took off and we
have no idea and so you know we don't
know what
particular forms of political pathology
are unique to women we have some sense
of what those that are
i don't think it's pathology but what
what i one thing i've been thinking
about is uh moral reasoning so you would
be familiar with um
kohlberg's work
right in the stages of moral development
and then
remember uh carol gilligan
came out i remember carol gail again
yeah
so she
so so what happened was kohlberg
measured stages of moral development in
children and the highest stage of moral
development was this uh universalism
where
we have principles that can be um
principles of fairness
that can be
you know
uh applied to where everybody fit you
know and
basically i'm probably mangling the
concept but there was
a bit of controversy because girls were
not scoring as high or not as many girls
were scoring
[Music]
uh
reaching that level of moral development
as boys so carol gilligan's theory was
that girls and women have a different
way of reasoning about moral problems
than boys and men
and she wrote a book called in a
different voice and she came up with
this concept of care ethics
well you know it it it makes a certain
degree of sense because women are higher
in agreeableness which is the empathy
and politeness dimension and it's
particularly
if you break it down into the aspects
which are compassion and politeness
the the biggest gender difference is in
compassion per se
and that makes a certain amount of sense
i would say from a biological
perspective given that women are the
primary caretakers for extreme for
infants and they need nothing but
empathy fun for the first nine months
pretty much empathy is is the whole
is the whole deal
yeah so i think i think it makes a lot
of sense and
i i mean i remember being at university
and um
we you know you have to do these trolley
problems where where you're trying to
work out you know what is the most moral
thing to do and i think it's a measure
of utilitarianism or something like that
and there's one
version of the trolley problem where
you're in an
attic and you've got a bait you've got
to make a choice between suffolk uh
smothering
a baby you're you're presumably your own
baby
who's going to cry
so you're you're hiding out from the
nazis in an attic you're up there with a
bunch of people who
will be killed if they're discovered by
the nazis and you have a baby
and you and the baby's going to start
crying or he's crying and you have to
smother the baby to death that's how the
famous uh sitcom mash ended that was the
last
that dilemma was exactly the last
episode of mash yeah okay yeah yeah know
that i i remember reading this um moral
dilemma at university and i was sort of
offended that anyone would even ask me
like of course i would never smother my
own baby i couldn't
you know i know i've got my own children
now
abstractions be damned
it's like how dare you even ask me i
would never do that to my own child and
and and you could i mean i'm sure this
is
fathers feel the same way as well but as
a as a mother you would let other people
be harmed to protect your own you just
would i mean i would i would protect my
child
before any other consideration
and so
i understand carol gilligan's theory and
i think it makes a lot of sense and it
intuitively
uh corresponds with the way with how i
feel and think
but i can also see that that kind of
oral reasoning
works for a family environment
and works for a mother and her children
it's not
probably not going to work
at a governmental level well that is
that is a question isn't it and that's
that's the question of the limp the
limits of empathy per se yeah you know
and we're trying to elevate empathy to
the prime virtue
and you know
one of the things i really appreciated
about freud and the psychoanalysts in
particular
was their insistence
that the good mother fails
okay right because
you you protect your infant at all costs
but by two you don't have an infant
you have someone who needs to go out
into the world and so you have to
control like my my my daughter-in-law
and and to her great credit her her son
is now he's 18 months old and he's going
to day care and she handled that
beautifully she she
took him to daycare for an hour a day
and it's just with three out three kids
and
for the first week and then two hours a
day for a week and then the whole eight
hours and she
the first day that he stayed there she
just dropped him off and left no drama
gone and then she went home and cried
it's like it was hard for her because
she'd been with this child for 18 months
for 24 hours a day and now this was the
first real separation and she had to be
tough about it despite the emotion you
know and and because she did it properly
he had virtually no trouble whatsoever
making the transition
but that that's not that's not exactly
that kind of empathy that reflexive
empathy that you just described right
that's something different that's the
ability to abstract yourself away from
protecting
this creature that's with you at all
cost right now and to think into the
future about what's more important of
facilitation let's say of this of this
drive to explore and to separate from
that maternal environment and that's a
that's an ethic as well and it's not
identical with reflexive empathy
yeah yeah well i think i think the
i think the ins the the difference in
moral reasoning and and of course you
know i'm simply referring to averages
and i honestly don't even know if
uh there are great sex differences in
moral reasoning between men and women
but if we're thinking about
government bureaucracies and thinking
about imposing moral frameworks on a
very large number of people in the
entire population you want something
that's
um
going to be
not going to be
engaging in any kind of
favoritism not going to
you you're going to want something
that's very cold and analytical
which way
you get the sort of utilitarian moral
framework which is there well it's a
good question it's a good question isn't
it you know at what level of social
organization does does empathy and you
know that would facilitate nepotism
how would it not
yeah and so
yeah and i think it it potentially
facilitates aggressive
aggression
because yeah well that's the dark side
that's the dark side of it well of
course one of the things empathy does
obviously is tighten in-group
relationships for the empathetic circle
and so who's outside the empathetic
circle well snakes and vipers obviously
and that is a danger that that's the
dark side of empathy that's part of the
devouring mother what would you call it
pathology that the psychoanalysts were
so good at delineating yeah and so that
dark the dark side of that so
well
claire i'm coming to australia i think
in next fall
oh wonderful i think that's the plan so
i'm doing a tour next year by the looks
of things if i can manage to stay on my
feet so i would really like to see you
again when we
yeah that would be that would be
brilliant and and congratulations on
quillette and and your success at
finding that nation and also on your
encouragement of these young writers and
and that's such a great accomplishment
to manage that and and good luck with
your academic publishing plans that's
that's a killer idea i think oh yeah i'd
be interesting to see if you can manage
that and manage to monetize it
successfully because that's the topic
that's the challenge you bet man that's
a real challenge
so yeah and thanks very much for talking
to me today yeah no thank you jordan
it's a pleasure
yeah it's really good to see you
[Music]
you